Writing-packages (#2927)
the-turing-way/the-turing-way: book/website/reproducible-research/code-reuse/code-reuse-packages.md

(rr-code-reuse-packages)=
# Overview of writing packages

This section provides an overview of why software packages and libraries are useful for code reproducibility and why you might want to write your own packages. 

> Packages are written to a high standard of reproducible code (see the guidelines for [publishing an R package on CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/policies.html)), where recommendations such as those found in the {ref}`rr-code-reuse-details` and {ref}`rr-code-reuse-recommendations` sections are commonly employed to ensure reproducibility of the functionality of the package.

Author: Hopefully 2498f2b18d7a206742f6f2024d6ee5a55c3194e3 helps with this?

- Host your versioned codebase somewhere accessible. There are a whole range of places to host code depending on your use case. Public GitHub/GitLab repositories are extremely common especially in open source, where private repositories can be used for proprietary packages (think Matlab). Even just a local git repository might be enough for your use-case. 
- Use Continuous Integration /  Continuous Development principles and pipelines such as GitHub Actions, Jenkins, Travis or GitLab Runners to help with a range of testing procedures.
 - Consider submitting your package to a Central Resource such as those in the [](central-resources) above. There are usually strict requirements needed as your code is more likely to be distributed and used (more on this later on). Often GitHub repositories are used to store both stable and "daily"/"nightly" builds of a package in addition to a central resource so that users can submit bugs an contribute to the current version, while testing experimental versions as a preview. 

>  - Write a publication. This could be in the form of a a journal submission such as Numpy (in Nature!), or an abstract/paper in a conference proceeding. This allows you to peer review your package with experts in the field of intended use and might give more confidence to potential users that the package is robust.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Write a publication. This could be in the form of a journal submission such as Numpy (in Nature!), or an abstract/paper in a conference proceeding. This allows your package to be peer-reviewed by experts in the field of intended use and might give more confidence to potential users that the package is robust.
```

>  - Publicizing your package. If you have gotten as far as hosting and publishing your package for others to use, you can publicize it in a variety of ways to let people know about it. It used to be that getting your package into a Central Resource provided ample opportunity for your package to be shared, but as these resources grow this is not necessarily the case anymore. Aside from publications in journals - use social media such as Twitter, Discord and Slack, Medium articles and postings in websites. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Publicize your package. If you have gotten as far as hosting and publishing your package for others to use, you can publicize it in a variety of ways to let people know about it. It used to be that getting your package into a central resource provided ample opportunity for your package to be shared, but as these resources grow this is not necessarily the case anymore. Aside from publications in journals, use social media such as Twitter, Discord and Slack, as well as Medium articles and blog posts. 
```

>  - Build a community. Hopefully a few collaborators will have worked together to build a package - and by thinking about how the initial developers of the packages interact with future users you might be able to build a strong community that will help improve and maintain the package going forward.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Build a community. Hopefully a few collaborators will have worked together to build a package, and by thinking about how the initial developers of the packages interact with future users you might be able to build a strong community that will help improve and maintain the package going forward.
```

>  ## Get Started - use a template

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Get Started - use a template
```

> With so many existing packages across many languages - it should be pretty easy to find good examples of packages and their published code on somewhere such as GitHub. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With so many existing packages across many languages, it should be pretty easy to find good examples of packages and their published code on software repositories such as GitHub.
```

Reviewer: Should this be re-worded to suggest that the reader consult the repository of their favourite packages to see how they’re implemented?

> Looking at the code base can give you an idea of how to structure your own packages, but they can be a little daunting especially if they are well established, widely used packages. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Looking at the codebase can give you an idea of how to structure your own packages, but they can be a little daunting especially if they are well-established, widely used packages. 
```

> As mentioned previously, there are packages that are aimed to help you create your own packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned previously, there are packages that are specifically meant to help you create your own packages.
```

> These work by creating the underlying structure of a package or even simulated toy repositories that you can then customize as you see fit. Such templates will often factor in locations for documentation, code commenting conventions and built-in code linting and sub-directories for header files like you might find in the c programming language. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These work by creating the underlying structure of a package or even simulated toy repositories that you can then customize as you see fit.
Such templates will often factor in locations for documentation, code commenting conventions and built-in code linting, and sub-directories for header files like you might find in the C programming language. 
```

## Walkthrough of creating a package in R

> Let's walk through creating a basic package in R using with some help from some specialized packages, particularly the `usethis` and `roxygen2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's walk through creating a basic package in R using with some help from some specialized packages, particularly `usethis` and `roxygen2`.
```

Begin by loading some go-to libraries that help package development in R

```r
library(devtools)   # various developer tools
library(usethis)    # create templates for repetitve tasks
library(roxygen2)   # automatically render documentation files from commented code
library(assertthat) # unit testing within functions
```
Create a skeleton directory template commonly used for R packages - will include a Description file, sub-directory for R function files, a NAMESPACE file for global package information and an .Rproj file to easily share and load local project directories.

```r
usethis::create_package("/RDemoPackage")

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```

````

```
├── DESCRIPTION
├── NAMESPACE
├── R
└── RDemoPackage.Rproj

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```

````

> Create a .R file in the R/ subdirectory and write a function to convert from degrees C to Kelvin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a `.R` file in the R/ subdirectory and write a function to convert from degrees Celsius to Kelvin.
```

> Notice that we have some code comments in the preamble that well get used to render a markdown file for the documentation (we use `roxygen2` to use these comments)

Reviewer: Not sure if “use these comments” is right here, but can’t say what was meant…

> Notice that we have some code comments in the preamble that well get used to render a markdown file for the documentation (we use `roxygen2` to use these comments)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that we have some code comments in the preamble that will get used to render a markdown file for the documentation (we use `roxygen2` for this).
```

```bash

# create a function to convert degrees C to Kelvin

#' Converts degrees C to Kelvin
#'
#' Allows the user to input temperature in degrees C and return the corresponding value in degrees Kelvin
#'
#' @param print_statement a logical value indicating
#' whether to print the statement (default is \code{TRUE})
#'
#' @import dplyr
#'
#' @export
#'
#' @return \code{my_function} prints a declaration
#' announcing itself if the parameter is \code{TRUE}
#'
#' @examples
#' celsius_to_kelvin(12)
#'

celsius_to_kelvin <- function(temp_C) {
  # assert value in degrees C greater than a certain amount
  assert_that(temp_C > -89.2,
              msg = "The temperature in degrees C entered is lower
              than the lowest recorded ground temperature on earth at
              −89.2 °C (−128.6 °F; 184.0 K) at the then-Soviet Vostok Station

>               in Antarctica on 21 July 1983. It is likely you have entered an incorrect temperature")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
              in Antarctica on 21 July 1983. It is likely you have entered an incorrect temperature.")
```

  # make the calculation
  temp_K <- temp_C + 273.15
  return(temp_K)
}

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```

````

We also used the `assert_that()` function from the `assertthat` package that allows us to unit test within functions in R. In this case we don't allow the user to input a temperature of below -89.2 degrees C. We then use the document() function from the `roxygen2` package to automatically render documentation in the form of a markdown file based on the comments at the top of the function file.

```r
document()

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```

````

> We can then install and load our new package in our local environment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can then install and load our new package in our local environment

```

```r
install()
library(TempConvert)

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```

````

> Finally - if we push our code up to GitHub, anyone can install it using the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally - if we push our code up to GitHub, anyone can install it using the following:

```
